FINAL

JOINT COMMUNIQUÉ OF THE 58TH ASEAN FOREIGN MINISTERS’ MEETING
KUALA LUMPUR, 9 JULY 2025
1.

The 58th ASEAN Foreign Ministers’ Meeting (AMM) was held on 9 July 2025, in
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. The Meeting was chaired by Malaysia under the theme
“Inclusivity and Sustainability”.

2.

The Meeting was opened by The Honourable Dato’ Seri Anwar Ibrahim, Prime
Minister of Malaysia. In his remarks, Prime Minister Anwar highlighted ASEAN's
strength in its habits of cooperation and its willingness to keep engaging. He
emphasised that ASEAN is a region that charts its own course deliberately,
coherently, and with purpose. Prime Minister Anwar underlined the principle of
Centrality as ASEAN's guiding principle, which is crucial for maintaining the
region's role as the primary anchor for dialogue and ensuring external partners
continue to find value in engaging with ASEAN. In line with the ASEAN 2045:
Our Shared Future, he called for greater synergy across pillars and sectors, and
proposed for ASEAN Foreign Ministers and ASEAN Economic Ministers to move
in concert in facing challenges. He underscored the importance of fortifying
ASEAN’s internal foundations, by increasing intra-ASEAN trade and investment
and advancing integration across sectors.
ASEAN COMMUNITY BUILDING

3.

We recognised the significant progress achieved in deepening regional
integration, strengthening ASEAN Centrality and unity, and fostering a stable,
prosperous, and people-centred Community through the full and effective
implementation of the ASEAN Community Vision 2025. We welcomed the 10th
anniversary of the ASEAN Community and recognised that the Vision and its
attendant Blueprints, the Master Plan on ASEAN Connectivity (MPAC) 2025 and
the Initiative for ASEAN Integration Work Plans III and IV, have guided ASEAN’s
collective efforts in fostering regional peace, stability and prosperity. We also
recognised the substantial benefits realised from the ASEAN Political-Security
Community (APSC), ASEAN Economic Community (AEC), ASEAN SocioCultural Community (ASCC), ASEAN Connectivity and the Initiative for ASEAN
Integration, which have reinforced ASEAN as a united, inclusive, integrated,
resilient and forward-looking Community.

4.

We reaffirmed the strategic importance of the ASEAN 2045: Our Shared Future
and looked forward to its full and effective implementation towards realising a
resilient, innovative, dynamic and people-centred ASEAN Community. We
further reaffirmed our commitment to maintaining ASEAN-centred, open,
inclusive, transparent and rules-based regional architecture that upholds
international law, and to strengthening mutually beneficial engagement and

1

cooperation with external partners on the four priority areas of the ASEAN
Outlook on the Indo-Pacific (AOIP) through ASEAN-led mechanisms.
5.

We looked forward to the outcomes of the End-of-Term Reviews of the APSC
Blueprint 2025, AEC Blueprint 2025, ASCC Blueprint 2025, and the MPAC 2025,
and agreed to integrate the lessons learned and best practices to effectively
realise ASEAN 2045: Our Shared Future and further advance ASEAN
Community-building.

6.

We reaffirmed our shared commitment to maintaining and promoting peace,
security and stability in the region, as well as to the peaceful resolution of
disputes, including full respect for legal and diplomatic processes, without
resorting to the threat or use of force, in accordance with international law,
including the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS).

7.

We reiterated the importance of strengthening ASEAN’s institutional capacity
and effectiveness to further advance the ASEAN Community. We recalled the
ASEAN Leaders’ Statement on Strengthening ASEAN’s Capacity and
Institutional Effectiveness and the Recommendations on Strengthening
ASEAN’s Capacity and Institutional Effectiveness. In this regard, we encouraged
greater coordination among relevant ASEAN Organs and Sectoral Bodies to
ensure the effective implementation of strategic measures on institutional
strengthening in the APSC Strategic Plan of the ASEAN Community Vision 2045.

8.

We acknowledged the continuous efforts of the ASEAN Organs and Sectoral
Bodies in advancing ASEAN Community-building. We welcomed their ongoing
work to develop and align their respective Work Plans to support the realisation
of the ASEAN 2045: Our Shared Future.

9.

We welcomed the development of the Complementarities Initiative 2.0, which
builds on the 2017 Complementarities Initiative, with a renewed focus on
addressing emerging sustainability challenges in line with the ASEAN 2045: Our
Shared Future. We reaffirmed the importance of enhancing synergies between
the ASEAN 2045: Our Shared Future and the United Nations 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (UN 2030 Agenda). We further emphasised the need
for stronger and more coordinated collaboration to accelerate progress toward
the ASEAN 2045: Our Shared Future and the UN 2030 Agenda, including
through the work of the ASEAN Centre for Sustainable Development Studies and
Dialogue (ACSDSD), and to fully and effectively implement the Pact for the
Future and its annexes, the Global Digital Compact and Declaration on Future
Generations.

10. We welcomed the forthcoming ASEAN Sustainable Developemnt Goals (SDGs)
Indicators Progress Report 2025, which will track ASEAN’s progress in achieving
the SDGs by analysing selected indicators for each goal. We looked forward to
its successful completion as a key tool to support evidence-based policymaking
in the region.
11. We welcomed the convening of the 2nd ASEAN Future Forum under the theme
“Building a United, Inclusive and Resilient ASEAN amid Global Transformation”,
2

held on 25-26 February 2025 in Ha Noi, Viet Nam. We recognised that this Forum
meaningfully complemented the ongoing agenda in ASEAN and its Report was
submitted to ASEAN Leaders for notation and circulated to relevant sectoral
bodies for reference. We further welcomed Viet Nam’s plan to convene the
ASEAN Future Forum in the years to come.
12. We reaffirmed ASEAN’s commitment to an inclusive and sustainable regional
community by supporting Timor-Leste’s full membership in ASEAN. We
underscored our commitment to implement the ASEAN Leaders’ decision at the
46th ASEAN Summit, as follows: “to admit Timor-Leste as the 11th member of
ASEAN at the 47th ASEAN Summit in October 2025 and task our Ministers and
Senior Officials to undertake the procedural steps for the admission of TimorLeste by the 47th ASEAN Summit, as well as to expedite negotiations on the key
economic agreements.” We welcomed Timor-Leste’s commitment to accede to,
implement and abide by all ASEAN treaties, conventions, agreements and
instruments under the three ASEAN Community pillars, in accordance with
Criterion II of the objective and criteria-based Roadmap for Timor-Leste’s Full
Membership in ASEAN, which was adopted by the Leaders at the 42 nd ASEAN
Summit in May 2023 as the basis for Timor-Leste’s membership in ASEAN. We
expressed our readiness to support Timor-Leste in this regard, in accordance
with each instrument’s provisions. We expressed our commitment to support
Timor-Leste in expediting its early accession to the key ASEAN economic
agreements to facilitate its full integration into ASEAN. We looked forward to
Timor-Leste fulfilling its roles and obligations as an incoming member state and
its commitment to uphold ASEAN’s fundamental principles.
13. We commended Timor-Leste’s active participation as an Observer in ASEAN
meetings and its commitment to full membership and fulfilling all criteria under
the Roadmap for Timor-Leste’s Full Membership in ASEAN. We encouraged
Timor-Leste to continue accelerating its institutional capacities and deepening
engagement with all ASEAN Sectoral Bodies to carry out the obligations of
ASEAN membership. We further encouraged continued efforts by Timor-Leste
to align its domestic policies, processes, and frameworks with ASEAN
agreements and frameworks, in promoting a smooth and effective integration
process.
14. We looked forward to Timor-Leste’s meaningful contribution to the
implementation of the ASEAN 2045: Our Shared Future, noting that TimorLeste’s efforts towards ASEAN integration will help strengthen ASEAN’s
resilience, inclusivity, and sustainability. We welcomed the operationalisation of
the Timor-Leste Unit at the ASEAN Secretariat, which will serve as a vital
mechanism to facilitate Timor-Leste’s integration into ASEAN structures and
processes and to support and monitor Timor-Leste’s full implementation of the
Roadmap. We encouraged continued engagement and support from ASEAN
Member States to facilitate Timor-Leste’s transition towards ASEAN
membership, as well as its continued efforts to fulfil the Roadmap following its
admission to ASEAN.
15. We agreed to coordinate and provide mutual support for ASEAN Member States’
candidacy in regional and international organisations, where possible. In this
3

regard, we reaffirmed ASEAN’s support for the Philippines to become a NonPermanent Member of the UN Security Council (UNSC) for the term 2027-2028,
as well as for Viet Nam to become a Member to the United Nations Human Rights
Council (UNHRC) for the term 2026-2028, as ASEAN candidates. We
encouraged the ASEAN SOM Leaders to continue their discussions on the draft
guidelines for designating ASEAN candidatures to the UN bodies and
international organisations, which will further manifest ASEAN Centrality, unity
and solidarity, and contribute to the enhancement of ASEAN’s profile at
international fora.
ASEAN Connectivity
16. We commended the ASEAN Connectivity Coordinating Committee, Lead
Implementing Bodies and relevant ASEAN Sectoral Bodies, as well as National
Coordinators, National Focal Points and relevant national agencies for their
dedication and support in ensuring the meaningful and effective implementation
of the MPAC 2025 by the end of this year.
17. We underscored the importance of implementing the ASEAN Connectivity
Strategic Plan (ACSP) to enhance regional connectivity among ASEAN Member
States and with external partners, leveraging synergies through the “connecting
the connectivities” approach. We looked forward to the further development of
activities to implement the Strategic Measures, as well as the finalisation of a
robust monitoring and evaluation framework to guide the future implementation
of the ACSP.
18. We looked forward to the convening of the 16th ASEAN Connectivity Symposium,
which will be held later this year in Malaysia, with the support of the Economic
Research Institute for ASEAN and East Asia. The Symposium will further support
Malaysia’s ASEAN Chairmanship priorities and foster greater collaboration for
the effective implementation of the ACSP.
ASEAN Smart Cities Network
19. We commended the ASEAN Smart Cities Network for its continued efforts in
advancing smart and sustainable urban development. We also appreciated the
support of ASEAN’s external partners through initiatives such as the ASEAN
Smart City Financing Toolkit, the ASEAN Smart City Professional Programme,
and Accelerating the Implementation of the ASEAN Sustainable Urbanisation
Strategy – Phase II. We looked forward to the 8th ASEAN Smart Cities Network
Annual Meeting and the 2nd ASEAN Sustainable Urbanisation Forum to be held
in Kuala Lumpur later this year.
Initiative for ASEAN Integration
20. We reaffirmed our commitment to narrow the development gap within and among
ASEAN Member States, including through the implementation of the Initiative for
ASEAN Integration (IAI) Work Plan IV (2021-2025), which made significant
progress with the continued support and assistance of ASEAN Member States
and its external partners. In the Work Plan's final year, we urged the IAI Task
4

Force, IAI National Coordinators, IAI Focal Points, and all other relevant
stakeholders to expedite the completion of all outstanding actions by December
2025. We agreed to ensure the successful conclusion of this phase and reaffirm
our commitment to develop the IAI Work Plan V. The new Work Plan will
incorporate elements of, and align with the ASEAN 2045: Our Shared Future,
drawing on the lessons from the implementation of previous IAI Work Plans, and
taking into consideration the recommendations from the Reframed Strategies for
Narrowing Development Gaps and Promoting Sustainable and Inclusive
Economic Growth within the ASEAN Region. We will continue efforts to realise
ASEAN Community that is no longer divided by the development gaps among its
Members, as well as to promote inclusive, participatory and equitable access to
economic opportunities.
Sub-Regional Cooperation
21. We reaffirmed the importance of ASEAN unity and Centrality in promoting subregional development. We recognised the relevance and complementarity of
subregional development to ASEAN’s regional integration and Communitybuilding process, especially in advancing economic integration and narrowing
the development gap. In this regard, we encouraged to explore, strengthen, and
promote closer coordination, collaboration, and synergy between ASEAN
Sectoral Bodies and ASEAN-approved sub-regional cooperation frameworks, to
facilitate the realisation of this endeavour, including in possible areas of
cooperation such as climate change mitigation and adaptation, smart agriculture,
energy connectivity, digital transformation, food, water and energy security.
22. We reiterated our commitment to further promote equitable, inclusive and
sustainable development across the ASEAN Community by aligning sub-regional
growth with the comprehensive development of ASEAN and strengthening
engagement with ASEAN-approved sub-regional cooperation frameworks,
including in the Mekong area, such as the Ayeyawady-Chao Phraya-Mekong
Economic Cooperation Strategy (ACMECS), as well as the Brunei DarussalamIndonesia-Malaysia-Philippines East ASEAN Growth Area (BIMP-EAGA), the
Indonesia-Malaysia-Thailand Growth Triangle (IMT-GT), and the SingaporeJohor-Riau (SIJORI) Growth Triangle. We noted the convening of the 11th
Cambodia-Lao PDR-Myanmar-Viet Nam Summit in November 2024, and the 16th
IMT-GT Summit and the 16th BIMP-EAGA Summit in May 2025. These initiatives
reflect ASEAN’s commitment to promoting equitable, inclusive and sustainable
development across all sub-regions of ASEAN. We welcomed the continued
support and assistance of external partners in the relevant processes.
ASEAN POLITICAL-SECURITY COMMUNITY
23. We reaffirmed the importance and relevance of the Treaty of Amity and
Cooperation in Southeast Asia (TAC) as a foundational code of conduct for interstate relations in the region and a cornerstone of regional peace and stability.
We remained committed to promoting and upholding the principles enshrined in
the TAC, and emphasised the responsibility of all High Contracting Parties
(HCPs) to fulfill their Treaty obligations. We welcomed the growing interest of
non-regional countries to accede to the TAC, based on respect for, and
5

adherence to, its purposes and principles. We welcomed the accession of the
People’s Democratic Republic of Algeria and the Oriental Republic of Uruguay.
We looked forward to the convening of the second iteration of the Conference of
the HCPs to the TAC, to be held in August 2025 at the ASEAN
Headquarters/ASEAN Secretariat, as part of the preparations for the
commemoration of the 50th Anniversary of the signing of TAC in 2026. We also
looked forward to the adoption of an ASEAN-sponsored resolution by the 80th
session of the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA) commemorating the
50th anniversary of the TAC.
24. We underscored the immense contribution of nuclear weapon-free zones to
nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation, and enhancing international peace and
security. We reiterated our commitment to preserve the Southeast Asian region
as a nuclear weapon-free zone and free of all other weapons of mass destruction
as enshrined in the the Treaty on the Southeast Asia Nuclear Weapon-Free Zone
(SEANWFZ) and the ASEAN Charter. We stressed the importance of the full and
effective implementation of the SEANWFZ Treaty, including through the Plan of
Action to Strengthen the Implementation of the SEANWFZ Treaty (2023-2027).
25. We noted that the Executive Committee of the SEANWFZ Commission is
continuing to explore the possibility of allowing individual Nuclear Weapon States
(NWS) which are willing to sign and ratify the Protocol to the SEANWFZ Treaty
without reservations and provide prior formal assurance of this commitment in
writing to go ahead with the signing. We welcomed any NWS that are ready to
do so. We reaffirmed our commitment to continuously engage all the NWS,
including those with reservations, and intensify efforts of all parties to resolve all
outstanding issues in accordance with the objectives and principles of
the SEANWFZ Treaty. We encouraged our ASEAN experts to explore ways to
bridge the differences, including the possibility of engaging with the NWS
experts.
26. We reaffirmed our commitment to enhancing the profile of the SEANWFZ Treaty
globally, including through engaging other nuclear weapon-free zones (NWFZs).
In this connection, we welcomed the adoption of the ASEAN-sponsored biennial
resolution on the SEANWFZ Treaty by the 78th Session of the UNGA on 4
December 2023, which reiterates the importance of the Treaty in contributing to
international peace and security. We tasked the relevant officials to work towards
the submission of the biennial SEANWFZ Resolution at the First Committee of
the 80th Session of the UNGA, which will reaffirm the Treaty’s important
contribution towards strengthening the security of States within the Zone and
towards enhancing international peace and security.
27. We looked forward to the entry into force of the Addendum to the SEANWFZ
Treaty and subsequent accession of Timor-Leste to the SEANWFZ Treaty by the
47th ASEAN Summit, which will further reinforce the region’s commitment to
nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. To this end, we underscored the
need to expedite our respective internal legal procedures to facilitate TimorLeste’s timely accession.

6

28. We continued to call on all States Parties to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
(NPT) to renew their commitment to its full and effective implementation,
particularly Article VI, to redouble efforts to protect the credibility and integrity of
the NPT and to rally towards a much-desired meaningful consensual outcome
document at the 11th NPT Review Conference in 2026. In this regard, we
supported the nomination of Viet Nam as the President of the 11 th NPT Review
Conference.
29. We expressed concern over the growing risks of nuclear danger and conflict,
further expansion and modernisation of nuclear arsenals, the increasing salience
of nuclear weapons in military and security doctrines, as well as the weakening
of the disarmament, and non proliferation architecture. We stressed that
progress on nuclear disarmament is urgently needed and reiterated the need for
strengthening the commitment to a world free of nuclear weapons amidst the
heightened geopolitical tension. We reiterated that the total elimination of nuclear
weapons remain the only guarantee against their use and risk of their
catastrophic humanitarian consequence.
30. We reaffirmed our commitment to the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention
(BWC), recognising the necessity of multilateral negotiations and noting the
absence of a verification mechanism, which continues to challenge the
Convention’s effectiveness. We expressed our continued support for the BWC
Working Group on Strengthening the Convention to strengthen the Convention
in a comprehensive and balanced manner.
31. We reaffirmed our commitment to the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC),
and recognised the importance of strengthening efforts to address current and
future global challenges related to chemical security and chemical disarmament.
We reaffirmed our full support to the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) to carry out its mandated work as the implementing body of
CWC in a comprehensive, objective, and impartial manner, in complementarity
with the work of the UN.
32. We noted ongoing multilateral discussions on emerging issues related to outer
space, and welcomed the decision of the UNGA RES 79/512 to establish an
Open-ended Working Group on the Prevention of Arms Race in Outer Space in
all its Aspects, which will help ensure the meaningful participation of States in
shaping the institutions and mechanisms that promote peace and stability in
outer space.
33. We expressed concerns about the possible negative consequences and impact
of autonomous weapon systems on global security and regional and international
stability, including the risk of an emerging arms race, lowering the threshold for
conflict and proliferation, including to non-State actors. We underscored the
importance of continued inclusive dialogue towards the development of a robust,
future-proof, and legally-binding instrument to address these challenges.
34. We commended the ASEAN Network of Regulatory Bodies on Atomic Energy
(ASEANTOM) for their continued efforts in enhancing cooperation among the
nuclear regulatory bodies in the region and in strengthening practices and
7

standards of nuclear safety, security, and safeguards guided by International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) standards and international best practices. We
looked forward to the successful conduct of the Nuclear Security Detection
Exercise Malaysia-Indonesia-Thailand-Singapore 2025, in July 2025 in Johor
Bahru, Malaysia, which will strengthen the joint coordination and readiness to
respond to nuclear security incidents and contribute to the development of
ASEAN regional nuclear and radiological incident response mechanisms. We
also looked forward to the convening of the 12th Annual Meeting of ASEANTOM
in August 2025, in Johor Bahru, Malaysia.
35. We acknowledged the vital role of the ASEAN Ministerial Meeting on
Transnational Crime (AMMTC) and its subsidiary mechanisms in advancing
ASEAN’s law enforcement cooperation and in spearheading cross-sectoral and
cross-pillar coordination in addressing the multi-dimensional aspects of
transnational crimes, particularly the growing threat of cybercrime and online
scams and trafficking in persons (TIPs) in the region, including smuggling of
migrants. We noted the efforts to align ASEAN and national efforts to prevent
TIP, protect and support victims, enforce trafficking laws, and prosecute
offenders under the Bohol TIP Work Plan 2.0 (2023-2028). We welcomed the
Vientiane Declaration on Enhancing Law Enforcement Cooperation Against
Online Job Scams, adopted by the 18th AMMTC in 2024, which underscored
regional efforts to address the growing threat of online job scams and associated
transnational crimes. We looked forward to greater synergy among and between
ASEAN Member States to fully implement, where applicable, the UN Convention
Against Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocols, particularly on
enhancing regional cooperation in combatting cybercrimes and other emerging
threats.
36. We also welcomed the Review of Priority Areas of the AMMTC in view of the
development of the renewed ASEAN Plan of Action in Combating Transnational
Crime (2026-2035), and the inaugural meeting of the ASEAN Senior Officials
Meeting on Transnational Crime (SOMTC) Working Group on People Smuggling,
held on 19 February 2025 in Penang, Malaysia, as a platform to strengthen
regional coordination and capacity to combat people smuggling and related
offences. We looked forward to the adoption of the ASEAN Declaration on
Countering People Smuggling in Southeast Asia by the 19th AMMTC, with
discussions led by Malaysia as the SOMTC Voluntary Lead Shepherd for People
Smuggling, along with the East Asia Summit (EAS) Leaders’ Statement on
Combating Online Scams and Related Transnational Crime Issues. We
welcomed the progress in the development of the ASEAN Border Management
Cooperation Roadmap and looked forward to its finalisation and eventual
adoption by the AMMTC.
37. We looked forward to the adoption of the ASEAN Leaders’ Declaration on
Enhancing Cooperation in Locating and Arresting Criminal Fugitives at the 47 th
ASEAN Summit in October 2025.
38. We welcomed Viet Nam’s hosting of the signing ceremony of the UN Convention
against Cybercrime, the first global treaty on this matter, on 25-26 October 2025

8

in Ha Noi, which underscores ASEAN’s shared commitment to strengthening
international cooperation in preventing and combating cybercrime.
39. Recognising the final implementation phase of the ASEAN Plan of Action to
Prevent and Counter the Rise of Radicalisation and Violent Extremism (PoA
PCVE) 2018-2025 and the Bali Work Plan 2019-2025, we encouraged all
relevant ASEAN Entities to intensify their efforts to fully implement the Work Plan,
including through collaborations with ASEAN Dialogue Partners and other
external parties, guided by the principles of ASEAN Centrality and mutual
respect. We also looked forward to the development of the successor document
of the PoA PCVE and its corresponding cross-sectoral work plan, building upon
regional best practices, including prevention, rehabilitation, and reintegration,
and utilising the role of community and religious leaders in strengthening social
resilience. We looked forward to the adoption of the ASEAN Leaders' Declaration
on the Use of Sports for Preventing Violent Extremism at the 47 th ASEAN
Summit.
40. We welcomed the adoption of the ASEAN Leaders’ Declaration on Enhanced
Cooperation Against Illicit Drug Trafficking and Precursor Chemicals, and
reaffirmed our resolve to prevent and to combat illicit drug production,
processing, trafficking, and abuse through a comprehensive and balanced
approach, towards a drug-free ASEAN. We emphasised the importance of
strengthening regional cooperation and developing holistic, integrated and
balanced strategies, evidence-based best practices and standards on policy
formulation and interventions to address both supply and demand reduction, to
achieve a balance between treatment and rehabilitation approaches as well as
the law enforcement approach in combatting drug crimes. We looked forward to
the 9th ASEAN Ministerial Meeting on Drug Matters, to be held on 23-24
September 2025 in Manila, Philippines. We also commended the ASEAN
Narcotics Cooperation Centre (ASEAN-NARCO) for its valuable publication of
the ASEAN Drug Monitoring Report series. We further commended the efforts of
the ASEAN Training Center for Preventive Drug Education (ATCPDE) based in
the Philippines, in enhancing the capacities of ASEAN Member States in
implementing drug abuse prevention programs.
41. We are concerned about the rise in non-traditional security issues, including
transboundary challenges. We are committed to enhancing cooperation to
address these security challenges, including issues related to food, water and
energy security, and health security, through concrete and practical activities, as
well as further strengthening cooperation with Dialogue Partners, and other
external parties to effectively address transboundary challenges.
42. We noted the advancements in regional and international connectivity and the
increasing frequency and number of nationals of ASEAN Member States
traveling outside the region, including in conflict-affected areas. In this regard,
we reaffirmed our shared commitment to provide emergency assistance in line
with the ASEAN Declaration on the Guidelines on Consular Assistance by
ASEAN Member States Missions in Third Countries to Nationals of Other ASEAN
Member States. We recognised the importance of further operationalising these
Guidelines under the auspices of the ASEAN Directors-General of Immigration
9

Departments and Heads of Consular Affairs Divisions of the Ministries of Foreign
Affairs Meeting (DGICM).
43. We welcomed the ASEAN National Security Advisors’ Meeting, held on 21-23
April 2025 in Malaysia which facilitated important discussions on regional and
cross-cutting security issues of common concern requiring coordinated policy
responses.
44. We also welcomed the substantive progress of practical cooperation under the
ASEAN Defence Ministers’ Meeting (ADMM) and ADMM-Plus. We welcomed the
adoption of the Joint Statement on Cooperation in the Field of Artificial
Intelligence in the Defence Sector during the ADMM Retreat in February 2025 in
Penang, Malaysia. We also noted the steps taken to operationalise the ASEAN
Cyber Defence Network (ACDN), including the development of the ACDN
Guidelines and Roadmap. We noted ongoing discussions to explore the relevant
and potential roles of defence establishments and militaries in protecting and
securing underwater infrastructure, such as submarine cables and pipelines,
including potential principles on defence cooperation as well as future regional
collaboration in this area to strengthen resilience and promote mutual
understanding.
45. We welcomed the inclusion of the ASEAN Militaries Ready Group on
Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief (HADR) Standard Operating
Procedure as an Annex to Standard Operating Procedure for Regional Standby
Arrangements and Coordination of Joint Disaster Relief and Emergency
Response Operations Chapter VI, which was recently approved by the ASEAN
Committee on Disaster Management. We looked forward to the establishment of
the ASEAN Military History Institutions Cooperation to enhance defence and
military collaboration, building trust and promote unity and resilience in the face
of the evolving security challenges.
46. We welcomed the second iteration of the Observership Programme in the
ADMM-Plus Experts’ Working Groups (ADMM-Plus EWGs), which now includes
five Observers across five EWGs, namely Canada, France, Germany, Türkiye
and the United Kingdom. We also noted the successful convening of the Maritime
Cooperation and Connectivity Conference as the first project in the
implementation of the AOIP from a defense perspective, which was co-hosted
by Indonesia and Japan in December 2024, and the proposal by Malaysia and
Australia to co-host a Maritime Cybersecurity Conference later this year, upon
approval by the ADMM.
47. We noted the UNGA Resolution A/RES/79/144 emphasising in the Preamble,
the universal and unified character of the 1982 UNCLOS, and reaffirming that
the Convention sets out the legal framework within which all activities in the
oceans and seas must be carried out and is of strategic importance as the basis
for national, regional and global action and cooperation in the marine and
maritime sectors, and that its integrity needs to be maintained.

10

48. In this regard, we welcomed India’s proposal to celebrate the year 2026 as the
‘ASEAN-India Year of Maritime Cooperation’ and agreed to submit it for the
Leaders’ approval at the 22nd ASEAN-India Summit in October 2025.
49. We further recognised the need to maintain and strengthen stability in the
maritime sphere in our region and underlined the importance of strengthening
maritime cooperation and exploring new initiatives towards this end, as
appropriate, including the convening of the 2nd AOIP Seminar Series: Submarine
Cables, held on 13 February 2025 in Jakarta, Indonesia.
50. We reaffirmed the role of the ASEAN Maritime Forum (AMF) and Expanded AMF
(EAMF) as Track 1.5 platforms for promoting maritime cooperation through
dialogue and consultations. Recognising the cross-cutting nature of maritime
issues, we encouraged stronger coordination among ASEAN sectoral bodies and
other relevant ASEAN mechanisms to avoid duplication. We emphasised the
importance of ASEAN Centrality and an integrated and comprehensive approach
to maritime cooperation. We are pleased with the progress of the implementation
of the two projects under the EAMF, particularly on the nominations for the Pool
of Experts, and future convening of the online consultation workshop to finalise
the EAMF website. We welcomed the convening of the 14th AMF and 12th EAMF
on 12-13 November 2024 in Vientiane, Lao PDR, and looked forward to the
convening of the 15th AMF and 13th EAMF in Malaysia in 2025.
51. We reaffirmed the importance of the ASEAN Treaty on Mutual Legal Assistance
in Criminal Matters (ASEAN MLAT) in strengthening ASEAN capacity and its
Member States’ cooperation in combatting transnational crimes. We commended
the ongoing efforts to conclude the ASEAN Extradition Treaty, and finalise the
Model Template for Mutual Legal Assistance Requests for the ASEAN MLAT.
52. We looked forward to the ASEAN Law Forum and the adoption of a Joint
Statement on International Commercial Arbitration and Mediation Development
by the ASEAN Law Ministers in August 2025 in Kuala Lumpur. This initiative
reaffirms ASEAN’s commitment to strengthening arbitration and mediation
frameworks in accordance with established international standards, fostering
more robust and efficient legal cooperation which supports regional economic
growth.
53. We welcomed the progress of the work of the ASEAN Intergovernmental
Commission on Human Rights (AICHR) in the promotion and protection of
human rights and in the mainstreaming of human rights across all pillars of the
ASEAN Community. We noted AICHR’s 2025 Annual Report and encouraged
AICHR to continue its work through an inclusive and consultative approach whilst
ensuring a purposeful and balanced discharge of its mandates. We also looked
forward to the adoption of the ASEAN Declaration on the Right to a Safe, Clean,
Healthy and Sustainable Environment. We also noted that AICHR is developing
a proposed ASEAN Declaration on Promoting the Right to Development and
Peace Towards Realising Inclusive and Sustainable Development.
54. We welcomed the convening of the 6th ASEAN Human Rights Dialogue on 5
November 2024 in Jakarta, and looked forward to the convening of the 7th
11

Dialogue later this year. We noted AICHR’s continuous efforts to improve crosssectoral and cross-pillar collaboration and its engagement with relevant ASEAN
Sectoral Bodies, stakeholders and external partners to advance human rights
cooperation. We encouraged AICHR to explore the way forward beyond the
ASEAN Enabling Masterplan 2025: Mainstreaming the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities. We approved AICHR’s Five-Year Work Plan (2026-2030) and its
Priority Programmes and Activities for 2026, aligned with the ASEAN 2045: Our
Shared Future. In this regard, we encouraged AICHR to further discuss emerging
human rights issues and increase public awareness on the importance of
promoting and protecting human rights, in accordance with the ASEAN Charter,
the ASEAN Human Rights Declaration (AHRD), the Phnom Penh Statement on
the Adoption of the AHRD, and the Terms of Reference (TOR) of AICHR.
55. We noted the initiatives of the ASEAN Institute for Peace and Reconciliation
(ASEAN-IPR) in advancing a culture of peace and moderation through
collaboration with relevant ASEAN bodies and external partners. We noted
ASEAN-IPR’s continued support for the ASEAN Women for Peace Registry
(AWPR) and efforts to implement the ASEAN Leaders’ Joint Statement on
Promoting Women, Peace, and Security (WPS) in ASEAN, and the Regional
Plan of Action on WPS. We looked forward to the 2nd ASEAN WPS Summit in
September 2025. We also welcomed the ASEAN-IPR Regional Conference on
Cybersecurity and the Role of Information Technology in Fostering a Culture of
Peace in ASEAN, held in February 2025 in Bangkok, Thailand, which facilitated
important regional dialogue on cybersecurity and peace.
56. We looked forward to the convening of the ASEAN Women, Peace and Security
Summit as a platform to promote the meaningful participation of women in
security processes, in accordance with the ASEAN Regional Plan of Action on
Women, Peace and Security in ASEAN. We encouraged the continued
implementation of the WPS and Youth, Peace, and Security agendas in ASEAN
and ASEAN-led mechanisms. We looked forward to the adoption of the TOR on
Enhancing Support Mechanism for ASEAN Women Peacekeepers (ESMAWP)
by the ADMM and the convening of the 3rd Workshop on the ESMAWP in August
2025 in Cambodia.
57. We looked forward to the adoption of an ASEAN-Australia Joint Leaders'
Statement on conflict prevention and crisis management during the 5th ASEANAustralia Summit which reflects our commitment in maintaining and promoting
peace, security and stability in the region, aligned with the ASEAN 2045: Our
Shared Future.
58. We commended the ASEAN Regional Mine Action Center (ARMAC) as a centre
of excellence and recognised its essential role in addressing the humanitarian
and socio-economic challenges posed by landmines and explosive remnants of
war (ERW). We also welcomed ARMAC's close collaboration with ASEAN
Member States' mine action authorities, relevant sectoral bodies, and
international partners, which has enhanced technical cooperation, joint training,
research, and knowledge-sharing, benefiting affected States and contributing to
regional stability.

12

ASEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY
59. We noted that ASEAN continued to demonstrate economic resilience, achieving
a growth rate of 4.8% in 2024, well above the global average, driven by strong
manufacturing exports and increased public capital spending in key Member
States. We are encouraged by forecasts indicating that this momentum is
expected to continue into 2025 with a projected growth rate of 4.7%.
60. We noted the briefing during our Meeting by the ASEAN Geoeconomics Task
Force (AGTF) on the evolving geoeconomic landscape and the challenges it
poses to the region. In this regard, we further noted the preliminary
recommendations by the AGTF, which called for ASEAN to deepen regional
economic integration, fully implement trade agreements such as the Regional
Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) Agreement, and leverage its
Centrality to shape the emerging economic order. In this connection, we agreed
to engage and coordinate with the ASEAN Economic Ministers, including by
exploring the possibility of having a meeting with the ASEAN Economic Ministers
at the sidelines of the 47th ASEAN Summit in October 2025.
61. We expressed concern over rising global trade tensions and growing
uncertainties in the international economic landscape, particularly the unilateral
actions relating to tariffs, which are counterproductive and risk exacerbating
global economic fragmentation and pose complex challenges to ASEAN’s
economic stability and growth. We underscored the importance of a predictable,
transparent, inclusive, free, fair, sustainable and rules-based multilateral trading
system, with the World Trade Organization (WTO) at its core. We reaffirmed our
commitment to work constructively with all partners to this end. We noted the
recent consultations between ASEAN Economic Ministers and our external
partners such as Australia, China, Japan, and New Zealand on recent regional
and global economic developments. We reaffirmed ASEAN’s commitment to
enhancing regional resilience and competitiveness through the upgrading of the
ASEAN Trade In Goods Agreement (ATIGA), ensuring the substantial conclusion
of the negotiations of the ASEAN Digital Economy Framework Agreement
(DEFA) to support digital transformation, enhancing interoperability and
unlocking new economic opportunities, advancing or upgrading Free Trade
Agreement (FTA) with external partners and maximising the utilisation of the
RCEP Agreement. We emphasised the need to diversify trade by expanding
engagement with new and emerging partners, including region-to-region
linkages such as with the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC).
62. We welcomed the conclusion of the negotiations to upgrade the ATIGA, which
will deepen and broaden the economic integration among ASEAN Member
States. We looked forward to the signing of the Second Protocol to Amend the
ATIGA at the sidelines of the 47th ASEAN Summit in October 2025.
63. We further welcomed the development of the ASEAN Framework for Integrated
Semiconductor Supply-Chains, aimed at enhancing regional prosperity,
resilience, and sustainability by fostering complementary supply chains and
strengthening the global competitiveness of ASEAN’s semiconductor industry.

13

64. We looked forward to the finalisation and adoption of the ASEAN Sustainable
Investment Guidelines this year, which will guide investment policy across
ASEAN, and among other objectives, seek to advance the SDGs.
65. We welcomed the collaboration between the World Intellectual Property
Organization (WIPO) and ASEAN in the development of an ASEAN Intellectual
Property Rights regime, particularly the ASEAN Intellectual Property Rights (IPR)
Action Plan 2026-2030. We welcomed the the WIPO Technology and Innovation
Support Center (TISC) Regional Meeting for Strengthening the ASEAN TISC
Network held in Siem Reap, Cambodia in February 2025.
66. We welcomed the establishment of the ASEAN Centre of Excellence for Micro,
Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) in Green Transition, which will serve as
a regional platform to coordinate capacity-building initiatives for MSMEs adopting
green and sustainable practices. Recognising its focal role in guiding and
energising ASEAN MSMEs towards circular and low-carbon economy, we
encouraged continued collaboration with partners within and beyond the region
to ensure the Centre’s long-term impact and sustainability.
67. We welcomed the strategic thrusts and key principles of the ASEAN Capital
Markets Forum Action Plan 2026-2030 to further promote more sustainable,
resilient, inclusive and financially empowered ASEAN capital markets. We also
welcomed the endorsement of the ASEAN Infrastructure Fund (AIF) Action Plan
2025-2028, which aims to expand the AIF’s lending capacity, support regional
infrastructure development, and introduce innovative financing mechanisms to
address cross-sectoral challenges, including to address ASEAN’s infrastructure
development needs and regional connectivity.
68. We commended ASEAN’s substantial progress in the adoption and promotion of
regional cross-border payment connectivity, with 18 live cross-border payment
linkages within the region and with economic partners such as Japan, India, and
Hong Kong, as well as progress in developing a multilateral payment connectivity
through Project Nexus. We encouraged sustained efforts to expand this network
as a means to deepen regional financial integration and enhance inclusive
economic growth.
69. We acknowledged the ongoing efforts to promote sustainable and efficient
regional transport, particularly through the ASEAN Transport Ministers Meeting.
We expressed support for the finalisation of the ASEAN Electric Vehicle (EV)
Implementation Roadmap, which will guide the development of a robust and
sustainable EV ecosystem. We also looked forward to the development of the
ASEAN Sustainable Aviation Roadmap and the ASEAN Regional Strategy on
Sustainable Ship Waste Management, aimed at advancing environmentally
responsible aviation and maritime sectors.
70. We commended the conclusion of negotiations on the ASEAN-New Zealand Air
Services Agreement (ANZ-ASA) and looked forward to its signing in 2025, with
the aim of strengthening air connectivity between ASEAN and New Zealand,
facilitating the smooth movement of people and goods, and supporting inclusive
and sustainable socio-economic development.
14

71. We reaffirmed our commitment to enhance energy interconnection, including by
accelerating the establishment of the ASEAN Power Grid (APG), as well as
through the Trans-ASEAN Gas Pipeline, ASEAN Petroleum Security Agreement
and Carbon Capture, Utilisation and Storage (CCUS). We welcomed the ASEAN
Ministers on Energy Meeting’s decision to realise the ASEAN Power Grid by
2045, as part of efforts to advance a secure, resilient, and interconnected lowcarbon regional energy future. In this regard, we looked forward to the signing of
the Enhanced Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on APG and the
endorsement of the TOR of the Subsea Power Cables Development Framework
by this year. We also welcomed the progress and contributions of the Lao PDRThailand-Malaysia-Singapore Power Integration Project (LTMS-PIP) as well as
continued discussions on the Brunei Darussalam-Indonesia-MalaysiaPhilippines Power Integration Project (BIMP-PIP).
72. We commended the ASEAN Ministers on Agriculture and Forestry for promoting
sustainable development in the food, agriculture, and forestry sectors. We
welcomed the development of the ASEAN Leaders’ Declaration on the Vision for
Food, Agriculture, and Forestry towards 2045, which reaffirms our shared
commitment to a cooperative, sustainable, and resilient future. We looked
forward to the development of the Framework for Cooperation in Food,
Agriculture and Forestry Sector towards 2045 to operationalise the Leaders’
Declaration.
73. We acknowledged that sustainable food production and resilient agricultural
practices, including sustainable production of vegetable oils, are essential to the
attainment of the SDGs by 2030 and will contribute to regional and global efforts
towards economic recovery, green growth, and food security. We looked forward
to the convening of the Fourth Joint Working Group on Palm Oil between the
European Union (EU) and Relevant ASEAN Member States to continue
promoting mutual understanding on the sustainable production of vegetable oils
and addressing the challenges in this sector in a holistic, transparent, and nondiscriminatory manner.
74. In response to the increasing global demand for halal food, we looked forward to
strengthening regional coordination to promote halal food trade by harmonising
national standards with regional and international benchmarks. We strongly
encouraged active engagement by all relevant stakeholders, particularly the
private sector, to elevate ASEAN’s halal food industry, including through the
exchange and sharing of experience and best practices.
75. We welcomed the ongoing progress on the ASEAN Minerals Development Vision
(AMDV) and its accompanying Declaration, aimed at positioning ASEAN as a
prime destination for sustainable minerals investments reliable global supplier of
strategic minerals and key enabler of global supply chain diversification.
76. We commended the ASEAN Tourism Ministers for enhancing regional
cooperation and driving economic growth through strengthening ASEAN tourism
competitiveness, ensuring sustainable and inclusive tourism development and
advancing capacity building in the tourism sector. We looked forward to the
development of the ASEAN Leaders’ Declaration on Quality Tourism, which will
15

promote best practices, high-quality standards and digital transformation in the
tourism sector. We also looked forward to the development of the ASEAN
Tourism Outlook Towards 2030 as a strategic instrument to guide regional postpandemic tourism recovery and long-term growth, positioning Southeast Asia as
a diverse and attractive global destination. We also looked forward to the
adoption of the ASEAN-India Joint Leaders’ Statement on Sustainable Tourism
at the 22nd ASEAN-India Summit.
77. We welcomed the progress in the negotiations of the ASEAN DEFA and looked
forward to its substantial conclusion by this year. We stressed the importance of
building ASEAN Member States’ policy and institutional readiness to ensure the
effective implementation of DEFA and to foster a dynamic, inclusive, and
sustainable digital economy in ASEAN.
78. We commended the ASEAN Digital Ministers (ADGMIN) for their active efforts in
enhancing regional digital cooperation and driving economic growth through
strengthened ASEAN digital competitiveness, sustainable and inclusive digital
development, and the advancement of digital human capital. ADGMIN’s
significant achievements, including the development of ASEAN 5G
infrastructure, the promotion of robust digital data governance, and concerted
actions to combat online scams, have been key milestones in advancing regional
cooperation. We also welcomed key initiatives led by the ASEAN Working Group
on Digital Data Governance and ASEAN Working Group on Submarine Cables,
as well as the progress in shaping ASEAN’s digital future through the
development of key regional frameworks, including the ASEAN Digital Master
Plan 2026-2030 and the ASEAN Cybersecurity Strategic Plan 2026-2030. We
recognised the growing threat of online scams and are committed to supporting
and advancing initiatives under the ASEAN Working Group on Anti-Online Scam.
79. We welcomed the ASEAN Working Group on AI Governance’s (WG-AI) efforts
to institutionalise principles of AI safety, ethics and governance, including
through the development of the ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics
(2024) and the Expanded ASEAN Guide on AI Governance and Ethics –
Generative AI (2025). We noted ongoing efforts to develop a Declaration on the
Establishment of an ASEAN AI Safety Network (AI SAFE).
80. We welcomed the progress in operationalising the ASEAN Regional Computer
Emergency Response Team (CERT), launched in October 2024 in Singapore,
and its information sharing mechanism. This initiative is a significant step towards
enhancing regional cyber resilience through timely information sharing and the
exchange of best practices among ASEAN Member States. We welcomed the
endorsement of the ASEAN Norms Implementation Checklist, which will support
capacity-building and responsible state behaviour in cyberspace, in alignment
with ASEAN’s voluntary norms framework. We also commended the ongoing
regional capacity-building work undertaken by the ASEAN-Japan Cybersecurity
Capacity Building Centre (AJCCBC) and the ASEAN-Singapore Cybersecurity
Centre of Excellence (ASCCE) in building regional cybersecurity resilience to
address emerging threats.

16

81. We welcomed the launch of the ASEAN Science, Technology and Innovation
(STI) Ecosystem Foresight 2035 Report, which outlines a strategic roadmap to
place ASEAN at the forefront of global scientific and technological advancements
and identifies opportunities for innovation-driven growth.
82. We commended the establishment of the ASEAN Technology Startup Ignite, a
year-long accelerator programme supporting entrepreneurship and innovation,
alongside the designation of 2025 as the ASEAN Startup Year. We also
welcomed the launch of the Startup ASEAN Portal, which connects over 10,000
ASEAN startups with more than 500 investors, contributing to a regional
innovation ecosystem valued at approximately USD131.2 billion.
83. We looked forward to the adoption of the ASEAN Blue Economy Implementation
Plan by the ASEAN Coordinating Task Force on the Blue Economy (ACTF-BE),
during the 2nd Meeting of the ACTF-BE to be held in Malaysia later this year. We
reaffirmed the importance of harnessing the full potential of the ASEAN Blue
Economy Framework as a catalyst for sustainable development, inclusive
growth, and regional cooperation. We welcomed the convening of the Workshop
and Study Visit on Small-scale Marine Fisheries Data Collection for Fisheries
Management in ASEAN on 14-17 July 2025 in Thailand.
84. We welcomed the full conclusion of the ASEAN-China FTA 3.0 Upgrade
negotiations, as announced at the Special ASEAN Economic Ministers-Ministry
of Commerce (AEM-MOFCOM) Consultation on 20 May 2025. We reaffirmed
ASEAN's commitment to work towards the signing of the ACFTA 3.0 Upgrade
Protocol at the sidelines of the 28th ASEAN-China Summit in October 2025,
which will enable ASEAN and China to respond to emerging economic
challenges and modernise trade practices.
85. We welcomed the ongoing efforts toward the substantial conclusion of the
ASEAN-India Trade in Goods Agreement (AITIGA) Review Negotiations in 2025.
We recognised its potential to expand market access, and deepen economic
linkages. We urged continued coordination to substantially conclude the AITIGA
review in a timely manner, strengthening ASEAN-India ties and contributing to
regional prosperity and sustainable growth.
86. We welcomed the entry into force of the Second Protocol to Amend the
Agreement Establishing the ASEAN-Australia-New Zealand Free Trade Area
(AANZFTA) on 21 April 2025 and looked forward to its full and effective
ratification by all Parties to ensure that it benefits businesses and communities
across the region.
87. We looked forward to commencing negotiations on the ASEAN-Korea Free
Trade Area (AKFTA) upgrade in 2026, to ensure that it remains relevant to
businesses, modern, forward-looking, and responsive to regional and global
developments.

17

ASEAN SOCIO-CULTURAL COMMUNITY
88. We commended ASCC’s efforts in strengthening data-driven platforms and
evidence-based decision-making through the ASCC Database for Monitoring
and Evaluation (ADME) System which supports strategic planning and the
effective implementation of ASCC initiatives.
89. We acknowledged the contributions of the ASCC Research and Development
(R&D) Platforms Programme in promoting evidence-based policies and
strengthening cross-sectoral decision-making. We welcomed the launch of the
ASCC R&D Platform on the Care Economy which will examine the valuation of
care work, the implications of demographic shifts, and the development of
sustainable care policies.
90. We welcomed the substantive progress made in advancing the ASEAN Creative
Economy, including the establishment of the ASEAN Creative Economy
Sustainability Framework, which provides guidance for the development of
inclusive, resilient, and sustainable cultural and creative industries across the
region.
91. We emphasised the potential of cultural heritage to promote economic growth,
social cohesion, cultural preservation and sustainability, and looked forward to
the adoption of the Melaka Declaration on Cultural Heritage Value Creation.
92. We acknowledged the commitment of the ASEAN Ministers Responsible for
Information (AMRI), in transforming media’s role to strengthen ASEAN’s
cohesion and mutual understanding, enhancing cooperation in combating fake
news and disinformation, and promoting the safe and responsible use of social
media platforms. In this regard, we welcomed the adoption of the Bandar Seri
Begawan Declaration to Reaffirm AMRI’s Commitment to Strategic Progress in
Media and Information, and looked forward to the adoption of the Kuala Lumpur
Declaration on Safe and Responsible Use of Social Media Platforms for ASEAN,
as a collective effort to foster a safer and more inclusive online environment
within ASEAN. In addition, we also noted the ongoing development of the
Guidelines for Safe and Responsible Use of Social Media Platforms for ASEAN.
We acknowledged the efforts of AMRI in developing a successor Work Plan for
Information and Media (2026-2035), and the ASEAN Communication Master
Plan III (ACMP III) (2026-2030) to align with the ASEAN 2045: Our Shared
Future.
93. We commended Malaysia for initiating the ASEAN Year of Skills 2025, a strategic
effort to equip the ASEAN workforce with future-ready skills to adapt to changing
labour markets and drive sustainable growth and to exchange best practices and
lessons learnt on ASEAN and regional skills standards, training curriculum, skills
assessment and certification, aligned with the ASEAN Guiding Principles for
Quality Assurance and Recognition of Competency Certification Systems.
94. We welcomed ongoing efforts to expand AI-driven training and upskilling
programmes for green jobs, including through the ASEAN Green Jobs Forum on
27-28 August 2025 in Malaysia, and looked forward to the adoption of the ASEAN
18

Ministerial Statement and Action Plan for Green Jobs Promotion in the Labour
Sector. We supported the provision of technical assistance on Al training for
ASEAN Member States.
95. We reaffirmed ASEAN’s commitment to protecting and promoting the rights of
migrant workers throughout the entire migration cycle through the ASEAN
Committee on the Implementation of the ASEAN Declaration on the Protection
and Promotion of the Rights of Migrant Workers (ACMW), including through
enhancing labour migration governance in ASEAN countries, fair and ethical
recruitment and effective return and reintegration for migrant workers, while
recognising the principle of shared and balanced responsibilities of the receiving
and sending ASEAN Member States, with all efforts carried out in accordance
with their national laws, regulations, and policies of respective ASEAN Member
States.
96. We recognised the significant impact of the migration and development nexus,
on the well-being, livelihood and welfare of the present and future generations of
the peoples who are at the center of the ASEAN Community. We acknowledged
the need to address migration issues in order to achieve ASEAN goals, including
through the relevant sectoral bodies and mechanisms, while respecting the
national laws and policies of ASEAN Member States.
97. We welcomed the convening of the Ministerial Roundtable on the Future of
Higher Education in June 2025 and the adoption of the ASEAN Leaders’
Declaration on Higher Education: Towards an Inclusive, Sustainable and
Prosperous ASEAN. This landmark document renews the commitment of the
Kuala Lumpur Declaration on Higher Education 2015, with further emphasis on
the importance of lifelong learning, innovative research, knowledge creation, and
planetary health in enhancing ASEAN’s human capital competitiveness.
98. We expressed appreciation for the continued work of the ASEAN Health
Ministers Meeting (AHMM) in advancing regional health development. We
commended Malaysia’s prioritisation of a healthy ASEAN as a driver of
sustainable economic growth, resilience, and regional prosperity.
99. We welcomed and looked forward to the effective implementation of the ASEAN
Declaration of Commitment on ASEAN Drug Security and Self-Reliance
(ADSSR) to strengthen our region’s vaccine, drug and diagnostic security and
self-reliance. The ADSSR reflects high-level commitment and engagement with
relevant ASEAN sectors, as well as Dialogue and Development partners.
100. We also expressed support for the ASEAN Essential Diagnostics Lists Initiative
(AEDLI) on the development of National EDLs, which aims to strengthen
healthcare systems by ensuring that people have access to the diagnostic tests
they need for timely and effective care.
101. We commended ASEAN’s efforts in addressing malnutrition through the ASEAN
Strategic Framework and Action Plan on Nutrition 2018-2030, and noted
progress in Multi-sectoral Approach to Sustain Food System for Healthy Diets in
Ensuring Food and Nutrition Security in ASEAN, Establishment of Framework on
19

Healthy Central Kitchen for Childcare Centres and Kindergartens in ASEAN, and
Establishment of ASEAN Guidelines on Healthy Plate Concept. We also noted
the progress of the ASEAN One Health Network, the 10-year milestone of the
Project on Strengthening ASEAN Regional Capacity on Disaster Health
Management; the strengthened ASEAN Risk Assessment Centre for Food
Safety (ARAC); the launch of the Five-Year Strategic Plan (2025-2030) of the
ASEAN Centre for Active Aging and Innovation, and the new intervention to
expand ASEAN’s clinical trial market share for industry sponsored clinical trials.
102. We noted the progress and urged the finalisation and conclusion of the
Establishment Agreement of the ASEAN Centre for Public Health Emergencies
and Emerging Diseases (ACPHEED) to strengthen ASEAN’s regional
capabilities in prevention, preparedness, detection, and response for public
health emergencies and emerging diseases. We also appreciated the
contributions of Dialogue Partners in the setting up and conduct of activities of
ACPHEED and looked forward to our continued collaborations.
103. We welcomed the adoption of the World Health Organization (WHO) Pandemic
Agreement by the 78th Session of the World Health Assembly presided by the
Philippines and look forward to the upcoming negotiation of its Annex on the
Pathogen Access and Benefit Sharing System.
104. We welcomed ongoing efforts to operationalise the ASEAN Leaders Declaration
on Strengthening Regional Biosafety and Biosecurity and encouraged
collaboration with relevant ASEAN Sectoral Bodies and external partners.
105. We reaffirmed the ASEAN Leaders’ commitment to promoting the critical role of
youth in socio-economic development and community-building, and emphasised
the importance of strategic stakeholder engagement in advancing reskilling and
upskilling, and the development of green and digital skills in both education and
labour sectors.
106. We reaffirmed ASEAN’s commitment to fostering inclusive growth through sports
and youth development. We welcomed the ASEAN Ministers of Education
Roundtable on Accelerating Innovative Strategies: Mitigating Out-of-School
Children and Youth (OOSCY) Challenges in June 2025 and the adoption of the
Langkawi Joint Statement on ASEAN OOSCY to advance equitable education,
as well as the establishment of the ASEAN Sports Fund to support nonprofessional competitive sports, and sports-related education projects, as well as
mentoring and capacity building programmes.
107. We expressed grave concern over the increasing impact of climate-related
losses and reaffirmed ASEAN’s commitment to enhancing regional coordination
on climate adaptation and mitigation towards a climate and disaster-resilient and
low carbon economy region. We looked forward to the adoption of the ASEAN
Joint Statement on Climate Change to the 30 th session of the Conference of
Parties to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC
COP30), and the operationalisation of the ASEAN Centre for Climate Change in
Brunei Darussalam.

20

108. We reaffirmed our collective commitment as outlined in the ASEAN Joint
Statement on Climate Change to the UNFCCC COP29 and our unwavering
dedication to jointly addressing the global challenge of climate change. We
acknowledged the potential contributions of ASEAN Member States through
emissions avoidance, emission reductions, emission removals, and carbon stock
enhancement, contingent upon scientific and technological advancements,
international cooperation, and enhanced support from developed countries,
including relevant initiatives related to carbon markets by ASEAN Member
States, to serve as models for integrated approach to sustainable development
and climate resilience in the region.
109. We emphasised the need for a comprehensive, evidence-based, forward-looking
and integrated regional approach to environmental challenges, including rising
sea-levels and shifting crop harvests that threaten food and water security,
among others, through halting and reversing biodiversity loss, preventing loss
and damage from climate change impacts, enhancing climate mitigation and
adaptation efforts including for coastal and marine ecosystem, ensuring the
sustainable use and management of water resources and promoting sustainable
development. We welcomed the progress in developing the Post-2025 ASEAN
Strategic Plan on Environment and the ASEAN Climate Change Strategic Action
Plan through a gender-responsive and socially-inclusive communication
strategy.
110. We commended the work of the ASEAN Centre for Biodiversity (ACB) as well as
the progress in advancing the ASEAN Biodiversity Plan to support the
implementation of the Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework. The
ASEAN Biodiversity Plan will complement ASEAN Member States efforts in
implementing their respective National Biodiversity Strategies and Action Plans
(NBSAPs). We welcomed the rapid progress in operationalising the Fund for
Responding to Loss and Damage, including the selection of the Philippines in
2024 as host country of the Board of the Fund.
111. We recognised the critical role of carbon markets in reducing greenhouse gas
emissions, mobilising climate finance, and supporting both mitigation and
adaptation efforts. We reaffirmed our commitment to enhancing technical
capacity and creating enabling environments for the development of carbon
projects, while aligning carbon standards through regional cooperation.
112. We noted with serious concern that transboundary haze pollution has adverse
impacts on the public health, well-being, and economies of ASEAN. We
emphasised that transboundary haze pollution arising from land and forest fires
remains a major concern in the region. We stressed the importance of remaining
vigilant and welcomed the ongoing preventive efforts to minimise transboundary
haze pollution during periods of drier and hotter weather. We reiterated our
commitment to the full and effective implementation of the ASEAN Agreement
on Transboundary Haze Pollution, and welcomed continued work to implement
the Second Roadmap on ASEAN Cooperation towards Transboundary Haze
Pollution Control with Means of Implementation (Haze-free Roadmap) 20232030, Second ASEAN Peatland Management Strategy 2023-2030, and Chiang

21

Rai 2017 Plan of Action for Transboundary Haze Pollution Control in the Mekong
Sub-Region.
113. We also welcomed the progress towards the establishment of the ASEAN
Coordinating Centre for Transboundary Haze Pollution Control (ACC THPC) in
Indonesia and resumption of the discussion to finalise the Host Country
Agreement of the ACC THPC. The operationalisation of the ACC THPC, as well
as the work of the ASEAN Specialised Meteorological Centre, the ASEAN
Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian Assistance on disaster management (AHA
Centre), the ACB, and the ASEAN Research and Training Centre for Space
Technology and Applications (ARTSA), in accordance with their respective
mandates under the Establishment Agreement of the ACC THPC, will facilitate
effective implementation of the ASEAN Agreement on Transboundary Haze
Pollution and further reaffirm ASEAN’s commitment in enhancing regional
cooperation and coordination on transboundary haze pollution in the ASEAN
region.
114. We welcomed the progress towards finalising the Implementation Plan of the
ASEAN Investment Framework for Haze-Free Sustainable Land Management,
which aims to mobilise finance, investment and resources from ASEAN
stakeholders and partners to promote sustainable land and forest management
and achieve a haze-free ASEAN by 2030.
115. We looked forward to the ASEAN Declaration on Future-Ready Public Service
by the ASEAN Cooperation on Civil Service Matters (ACCSM) Heads of Civil
Service to develop a resilient, innovative and ethical public service in ASEAN
through digital transformation, inclusive governance, merit-based practices,
regional collaboration, and people-centric approaches that meet citizens’
evolving needs.
116. We welcomed the finalisation of the Mid-Term Review of the ASEAN Enabling
Masterplan 2025: Mainstreaming the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, and
looked forward to its recommendations for mainstreaming the rights of persons
with disabilities.
117. We commended ASEAN’s continued progress in promoting gender equality and
the empowerment of all women and girls, in line with ASEAN’s frameworks for a
gender-responsive ASEAN Community across all three pillars.
118. We reaffirmed our commitment to advancing women’s economic empowerment
and the care economy agenda. We looked forward to the finalisation of the
Guidance Note to Implement the ASEAN Declaration on Strengthening the Care
Economy and Fostering Resilience Towards the Post-2025 ASEAN Community.
119. We expressed concern over the growing risks faced by children online and
offline, and commended the increasing cross-sectoral cooperation to strengthen
child protection and prevent online exploitation and abuse.
120. We welcomed the convening of the 14th ASEAN Ministers Meeting on Rural
Development and Poverty Eradication in advancing rural development, and their
22

efforts in eradicating poverty, and underscored the importance of rural-urban
linkages and the contributions of rural women and youth in achieving these goals.
Acknowledging the persistent development gap between rural and urban areas,
we underscored the importance of leveraging regional cooperation to increase
investment in basic services and local economies. In this regard, we welcomed
the continued operationalisation of the ASEAN Villages Network in spurring
inclusive community-led growth, including through rural tourism, smart village
initiatives, and the One Village One Product (OVOP).
121. We reaffirmed our commitment to strengthening ASEAN’s disaster resilience
amidst a rapidly evolving risk landscape. We looked forward to the adoption of
the ASEAN Ministerial Statement on the 20 Years of the ASEAN Agreement on
Disaster Management and Emergency Response (AADMER): ASEAN Vision for
Global Leadership in Disaster Resilience, which affirms ASEAN’s commitment to
working closely with the international community on global risk reduction. We
welcomed the progress of the development of the AADMER Work Programme
2026-2030.
122. We welcomed ASEAN’s participation at the Global Platform for Disaster Risk
Reduction (DRR) 2025 held in Geneva, Switzerland, and the issuance of its Joint
Statement, demonstrating ASEAN’s regional leadership in advancing regional
disaster resilience through the implementation of AADMER and its Work
Programmes. We took note of the convening of the Asia-Pacific Ministerial
Conference on DRR held in Manila in October 2024.
123. We reaffirmed the importance of promoting a whole-of-ASEAN approach to
disaster management and reiterated our commitment to the implementation of
the Bandar Seri Begawan Declaration on the Strategic and Holistic Initiative to
Link ASEAN Responses to Emergencies and Disaster (ASEAN SHIELD), and
the ASEAN Leaders’ Declaration on Sustainable Resilience.
124. We emphasised the importance of enhancing ASEAN’s capacity to implement
the ASEAN Declaration on One ASEAN One Response: ASEAN Responding to
Disasters as One within and outside the region. We commended the ASEAN
Coordinating Centre for Humanitarian Assistance on disaster management (AHA
Centre)’s continuous work in strengthening its information and communication
technology system, ASEAN Disaster Information Network, and Disaster
Monitoring and Response System. We expressed appreciation for the strong
commitment and support of ASEAN Member States and ASEAN partners to the
Disaster Emergency Logistics System for ASEAN (DELSA) and the ASEAN
Emergency Response Assessment Team (ASEAN-ERAT)
125. We further commended ASEAN’s collective response and the swift action
through the AHA Centre in providing assistance after the earthquake in Myanmar
on 28 March 2025, which resulted in significant loss of life, injuries, and
widespread destruction in Myanmar and Thailand. We also recognised the vital
role of the AHA Centre in coordinating humanitarian assistance, supporting and
facilitating relief operations, and ensuring timely and effective humanitarian
response to the affected communities. We welcomed the joint visit to Nay Pyi
Taw, Myanmar, by the Foreign Ministers of Malaysia and Thailand on 5 April
23

2025 to assess immediate humanitarian needs and support the delivery of
humanitarian relief to those affected by the earthquake. We reaffirmed our
continued support to Myanmar’s recovery efforts in the affected communities,
including through a possible ASEAN-led coordination mechanism with the AHA
Centre as coordinator. We recognised the role of the Secretary-General of
ASEAN as the ASEAN Humanitarian Assistance Coordinator (SG-AHAC), in
accordance with the current Terms of Reference.
126. We reaffirmed ASEAN’s continued support for Myanmar’s efforts to bring peace,
stability, and the rule of law, promote harmony and reconciliation among the
various communities, as well as ensure sustainable and equitable development
in Rakhine State. We emphasised the importance of and reiterated our continued
support for Myanmar’s commitment to ensuring safety and security for all
communities in Rakhine State as effectively as possible and facilitating the
voluntary return of displaced persons in a safe, secure, and dignified manner.
We welcomed the continued engagement and cooperation between Myanmar
and Bangladesh, including bilateral repatriation intiatives for the verified
displaced persons from Rakhine State. We looked forward to ASEAN’s continued
facilitation of the repatriation process through the implementation of projects as
the follow-up to the recommendations of the Preliminary Needs Assessment. We
also looked forward to the Comprehensive Needs Assessment when conditions
allow and encouraged the Secretary-General of ASEAN to continue identifying
possible areas for ASEAN to effectively facilitate the repatriation process.
ASEAN EXTERNAL RELATIONS
127. We underscored the importance of strengthening ASEAN unity and Centrality,
while remaining actively engaged, outward-looking, inclusive and nondiscriminatory in our relations with external partners. This includes utilising
ASEAN-led mechanisms such as the ASEAN Plus One, ASEAN Plus Three
(APT), East Asia Summit (EAS), ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) and ADMM-Plus
to foster mutual trust and confidence. We reaffirmed our commitment to
reinforcing an open, transparent, resilient, inclusive, and rules-based regional
architecture that upholds international law, with ASEAN at the centre. We
emphasised the need to cultivate a culture of dialogue and cooperation, instead
of rivalry, enhancing mutual trust and confidence, and respect for international
law, to promote peace, stability, and prosperous development.
128. We are committed to advancing an outward-looking ASEAN Community that
supports sustainable growth and strengthens regional resilience through
inclusive cooperation and collaboration with external partners. We noted the
increasing interest from countries and regional organisations outside the region
in developing stronger relations and substantive, meaningful and mutually
beneficial cooperation with ASEAN, including applications for formal partnerships
with ASEAN, which could contribute to ASEAN Community-building, regional
integration and development cooperation efforts. We agreed on the importance
of expanding engagement with new and potential external partners based on
shared interest, mutual benefit, and constructive engagement, including on the
AOIP four priority areas, in support of and to advance the ASEAN 2045: Our

24

Shared Future. We underscored ASEAN’s rising global relevance and its unique
convening power in an emerging multipolar global architecture.
129. We encouraged the support of all our partners to the AOIP to promote and
mainstream the implementation of concrete AOIP projects and activities,
including through workstreams under the AOIP’s four priority areas, as well as
explore further cooperation through relevant ASEAN-led mechanisms, centres
and institutions. In this regard, we also looked forward to the adoption of the Joint
Statement on Further Promotion and Implementation of the AOIP at the 28 th
ASEAN-Japan Summit.
130. We recalled the decision of the 54th AMM to undertake a comprehensive review
of the moratorium on new dialogue partnerships and advance ASEAN’s relations
with external parties and adopted the ASEAN Foreign Ministers’ Decision on
Enhancing ASEAN Relations with External Parties.
131. We welcomed the increased engagement between the Committee of Permanent
Representatives to ASEAN (CPR) and ASEAN’s external partners, including
through the 96 Non-ASEAN Ambassadors accredited to ASEAN. We also
acknowledged the vital role played by the 55 ASEAN Committees in Third
Countries and International Organisations in promoting ASEAN’s interests and
advancing partnerships globally.
132. We looked forward to the 5th ASEAN-Australia Summit, the 28th ASEAN-China
Summit, the 22nd ASEAN-India Summit, the 28th ASEAN-Japan Summit, the 26th
ASEAN-Republic of Korea (ROK) Summit, and the 13th ASEAN-United States
Summit, to be held during the 47th ASEAN Summit and Related Summits in
October 2025, in Malaysia.
133. We underscored that the establishment of a Comprehensive Strategic
Partnership (CSP) with ASEAN should be meaningful, substantive and mutually
beneficial. We welcomed the establishment of the ASEAN-ROK CSP at the 25th
ASEAN-ROK Summit to Commemorate the 35th Anniversary of Dialogue
Relations in October 2024 and reaffirmed our commitment to working closely with
the ROK to implement the CSP. We further welcomed the 50th anniversary of
ASEAN-New Zealand Dialogue Relations in 2025 and looked forward to the
establishment of the ASEAN-New Zealand CSP and the adoption of the Joint
Vision Statement at the ASEAN-New Zealand Commemorative Summit to be
held during the 47th ASEAN Summit and Related Summits.
134. We noted with satisfaction the significant progress in ASEAN’s relations with our
Dialogue Partners, Sectoral Dialogue Partners, and Development Partners
through the existing frameworks, Plans of Action (POAs), Practical Cooperation
Areas (PCAs) and development cooperation programmes. These instruments
continue to guide our relations and cooperation with our partners in support of
ASEAN Community-building and the ASEAN 2045: Our Shared Future, while
enabling ASEAN to respond proactively to regional and global challenges. We
looked forward to the adoption and implementation of successor POAs for the
period of 2026 to 2030 between ASEAN and Canada, China, India, New
Zealand, the ROK, Russia, and the UN. We also looked forward to the adoption
25

of the ASEAN-United States Leaders’ Joint Vision Statement to Promote
Stronger, Safer and More Prosperous ASEAN and America at the 13 th ASEANUnited States Summit.
135. We welcomed the encouraging progress made in ASEAN’s Sectoral Dialogue
Partnerships with Brazil, Morocco, Norway, Pakistan, South Africa, Switzerland,
Türkiye, and the United Arab Emirates, as well as Development Partnerships
with Chile, France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, and Peru. We also looked
forward to the convening of individual trilateral meetings between the ASEAN
Chair, the Secretary-General of ASEAN, and Brazil, Norway, Switzerland, and
Türkiye during the 58th AMM/PMCs.
136. We welcomed the progress in the implementation of the PCAs between ASEAN
and Brazil, Morocco, Pakistan, South Africa, Türkiye, and the United Arab
Emirates, respectively, for the period of 2024-2028. We noted the extension of
the timeframe of the PCA between ASEAN and Chile from 2021-2025 to 20212026. We also welcomed the adoption of the PCAs between ASEAN and the
Netherlands as well as with Peru for the period 2025-2029. We were pleased to
note that 2025 marks the 10th anniversary of the ASEAN-Norway Sectoral
Dialogue Partnership, and looked forward to the adoption of the successor PCA
for the period of 2026-2030 between ASEAN and Norway later this year.
137. We reaffirmed the importance of multilateralism and international cooperation,
and emphasised the value of ASEAN’s partnerships with regional and
international organisations including the UN. These partnerships are vital in
addressing global challenges, advancing shared goals, and promoting
sustainable development. In this regard, we looked forward to the continued
high-level engagement between ASEAN and the UN, including the 15 th ASEANUN Summit during the 47th ASEAN Summit and Related Summits. We
congratulated the United Nations on its 80th founding anniversary. We reaffirmed
our unwavering commitment to act in accordance with international law, including
the UN Charter, and its purposes and principles.
138. We welcomed the progress in implementing the ASEAN-UN POA (2021-2025)
and looked forward to the adoption of the ASEAN-UN POA (2026-2030). We
looked forward to the submission of the Complementarities Initiative 2.0 to the
15th ASEAN-UN Summit for notation.
139. We welcomed the convening of the 2nd ASEAN-GCC Summit and the ASEANGCC-China Summit in May 2025 at the margins of the 46th ASEAN Summit in
Kuala Lumpur. We looked forward to enhancing our relations with the GCC and
China, by strengthening cooperation on supply chain resilience, and the digital
and green economies, enhancing economic integration, and supporting
sustainable growth and energy transition efforts in the region in response to
global challenges and exploring cooperation in the field of halal food.
140. We also welcomed the convening of the 16th ASEAN-Economic Cooperation
Organisation (ECO) Ministerial Meeting and the 7th ASEAN-Pacific Alliance (PA)
Ministerial Meeting in September 2024 and encouraged the effective

26

implementation of the ASEAN-ECO Framework of Cooperation between ASEAN
and ECO (2024-2028) and ASEAN-PA Plan of Action 2020-2025.
141. We expressed our serious disappointment with the continued failure of the NonAligned Movement (NAM) to reflect substantive and factual updates on the
paragraphs relating to the South China Sea in NAM key outcome documents.
We called on all NAM Members to respect ASEAN, and ASEAN’s unity and
Centrality, especially on issues which directly affect peace and prosperity in its
own immediate region. We also called on all NAM Members to uphold their
commitment to the main goals and objectives of NAM as enshrined in the
Bandung Principles and to firmly uphold the principles of non-alignment while
promoting peace, friendship, solidarity, and cooperation among ourselves.
142. We reaffirmed the importance of the APT cooperation framework in promoting
peace, stability, prosperity, and regional cooperation in East Asian region, with
ASEAN as the driving force. We welcomed the substantive progress in the
implementation of the APT Cooperation Work Plan (2023-2027) and the
continued efforts to further strengthen APT mechanisms including the Chiang
Mai Initiative Multilateralisation (CMIM), the Asian Bond Markets Initiative
(ABMI), the Disaster Risk Financing (DRF) and the ASEAN+3 Macroeconomic
Research Office (AMRO), and ASEAN Plus Three Emergency Rice Reserve
(APTERR). We reaffirmed our commitment to further deepen APT cooperation,
including through tangible cooperation on the AOIP’s four priority areas to
contribute to greater regional sustainability and resilience, in support of the
implementation of the ASEAN 2045: Our Shared Future.
143. We reaffirmed our commitment to further strengthening the EAS as a premier
Leaders-led forum for dialogue and cooperation on broad strategic, political, and
economic issues of common interest and concern with the aim of promoting
peace, stability, and economic prosperity in the region, with ASEAN as the driving
force. In this regard, we welcomed the 20th anniversary of the EAS and looked
forward to the adoption of the Kuala Lumpur Declaration on the 20th Anniversary
of the EAS, which reaffirms EAS’ strategic value and relevance, as well as its
responsiveness to developments in an evolving global landscape. We further
reaffirmed our shared commitments and principles as reflected in the 2011
Declaration on the EAS on the Principles for Mutually Beneficial Relations (Bali
Principles).
144. We noted the progress in the implementation of the EAS POA 2024-2028, and
looked forward to deepening practical cooperation in EAS streams of work to
ensure coordination, cooperation and implementation of the EAS Leaders’
statements, declarations, decisions, and initiatives, with a view to strengthening
ASEAN external relations and ASEAN-led regional architecture and ensuring
that all engagements are ASEAN-driven, relevant, strategic, mutually beneficial,
and responsive to current and emerging challenges.
145. We expressed our commitment to advancing common goals and interests among
EAS participating countries while underscoring the importance of ASEAN unity
and Centrality in guiding cooperation under the EAS. We recognised the need to
strengthen EAS collaboration, including on the EAS streams of work and the
27

AOIP’s four priority areas to address new and emerging challenges and promote
regional resilience and sustainability, as well as intensify regular engagements
between the CPR and the non-ASEAN Ambassadors of EAS Participating
Countries in Jakarta. In this regard, we looked forward to the adoption of thematic
EAS Statements on Promoting Localisation in Anticipatory Action for Disaster
Preparedness and Response, Combating Online Scams and Related
Transnational Crime Issues, Strengthening EAS Cultural Cooperation,
Strengthening Energy Cooperation, and Inclusive Digital Economy at the 20th
EAS.
146. We reaffirmed the importance of the ARF as the leading regional security forum
in the Asia-Pacific region for fostering constructive dialogue and cooperation
among its Participants on political and security issues and emerging challenges
of common interest and concern, with ASEAN as the primary driving force. In the
face of increasingly complex challenges in the Asia-Pacific region and beyond,
we further encouraged ARF Participants to continue efforts in enhancing the
effectiveness and efficiency of its cooperation to move forward from confidence
building measures and preventive diplomacy in adherence to the principles
stipulated in the ARF Preventive Diplomacy Work Plan in order for the ARF to
progress to Stage II, Development of Preventive Diplomacy, of the three-stage
process in accordance with the 1995 ARF Concept Paper.
147. We underscored the need to undertake a holistic and comprehensive approach
to revitalise the ARF and maintain its relevance in the evolving regional security
architecture as well as its ability to address emerging political and security
challenges while fostering a more substantive, constructive, and interactive
dialogue among the Participants. In this regard, we welcomed the ongoing
discussions among ASEAN Member States on revitalising the ARF to ensure its
effectiveness and relevance. We also noted the progress in the implementation
of the Ha Noi Plan of Action II (2020-2025) and agreed to extend the HPOA II
until 31 December 2025 and commence the development of a new ARF POA, to
be adopted in 2026.
148. We are committed to enhancing our engagement with other potential partners in
the wider Asia-Pacific and Indian Ocean regions. We looked forward to forging
cooperation between ASEAN and the Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA), and
between ASEAN and the Pacific Islands Forum (PIF). We tasked the ASEAN
Secretariat to work with the respective PIF and IORA secretariats to develop
Cooperation Plan in accordance with the MoUs signed between ASEAN and
IORA and ASEAN and PIF on 4 September 2023.
REGIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL ISSUES
149. We recognised the strategic importance of our region for ensuring peace,
security, stability, and prosperity, as well as for those of our external partners.
ASEAN and ASEAN-led mechanisms remain inclusive, and open platforms that
facilitate constructive dialogue and tangible cooperation, contributing to the
evolving regional architecture in line with the ASEAN Charter and the AOIP.

28

Situation in the South China Sea
150. We discussed the situation in the South China Sea, during which concerns were
expressed by some Ministers on the land reclamations, activities, serious
incidents in the area, including actions that put the safety of all persons at risk,
damage to the marine environment, which have eroded trust and confidence,
increased tensions, and may undermine peace, security, and stability in the
region. We reaffirmed the need to enhance mutual trust and confidence, exercise
self-restraint in the conduct of activities that would complicate or escalate
disputes and affect peace and stability and avoid actions that may further
complicate the situation. We further reaffirmed the need to pursue peaceful
resolution of disputes, in accordance with the universally recognised principles
of international law, including the 1982 UNCLOS. We emphasised the
importance of non-militarisation and self-restraint in the conduct of all activities
by claimants and all other states, including those mentioned in the 2002
Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea (DOC) that could
further complicate the situation and escalate tensions in the South China Sea.
151. We reaffirmed the importance of maintaining and promoting peace, security,
stability, safety, and freedom of navigation in and overflight above the South
China Sea and recognised the benefits of having the South China Sea as a sea
of peace, stability, prosperity, and sustainable development. In this regard, we
underscored the importance of the full and effective implementation of the DOC
in its entirety. We welcomed the progress achieved so far in the ongoing
negotiations on the Code of Conduct in the South China Sea (COC), notably the
completion of the third reading of the Single Draft COC Negotiating Text (SDNT)
and encouraged continued positive momentum on the Draft COC. In line with the
Guidelines for Accelerating the Early Conclusion of an Effective and Substantive
Code of Conduct in the South China Sea, we looked forward to the early
conclusion of an effective and substantive COC that is in accordance with
international law, including the 1982 UNCLOS. We emphasised the need to
maintain and promote an environment conducive to the COC negotiations,
including the situation in the South China Sea, and thus welcomed practical
measures that could reduce tensions and the risk of accidents,
misunderstandings, and miscalculation. We stressed the importance of
undertaking confidence building and preventive measures to enhance, among
others, trust and confidence amongst parties, and we reaffirmed the importance
of upholding international law, including the 1982 UNCLOS.
Developments in Myanmar
152. We expressed our deep concern over the escalation of conflicts and
humanitarian situation in Myanmar, and encouraged progress on the
implementation of the ASEAN Leaders’ Five-Point Consensus (5PC). We
reaffirmed our united position that the 5PC remains our main reference to
address the political crisis in Myanmar and further reaffirmed the relevant
Leaders’ decisions. We denounced the continued acts of violence against
civilians and public facilities and urged all parties involved to take concrete action
to immediately halt indiscriminate violence, exercise utmost restraint, ensure the
protection and safety of all civilians and civilian infrastructures, and create a
29

conducive environment for the delivery of humanitarian assistance and inclusive
national dialogue. In this regard, we reaffirmed the ASEAN Leaders’ Statement
on an Extended and Expanded Ceasefire in Myanmar. We also welcomed the
continued progress in the provision of humanitarian assistance to Myanmar by
the AHA Centre in support of Point 4 of the ASEAN Leaders’ 5PC.
153. We commended the dedicated efforts of H.E. Tan Sri Othman Hashim as the
Special Envoy of the ASEAN Chair on Myanmar, since his appointment in
January 2025. In carrying out his mandate, the Special Envoy has actively
engaged a wide and diverse range of Myanmar stakeholders. The Special Envoy
has also engaged ASEAN Member States, ASEAN Dialogue Partners, Myanmar
neighbouring countries, international and regional partners, civil society
organisations, humanitarian actors, and think tanks towards finding an inclusive
and sustainable resolution to the crisis. This inclusive engagement reflects
ASEAN’s commitment to collaborative efforts in addressing the complex
challenges in Myanmar. We will conduct our comprehensive review of the 5PC
implementation and submit our recommendations to the 47 th ASEAN Summit.
We also agreed to task our Senior Officials to explore new strategies to ensure
continuity in the role of the ASEAN Special Envoy on Myanmar.
Developments in the Korean Peninsula
154. We expressed concern over the recent developments in the Korean Peninsula
and stressed the importance of resuming peaceful dialogue among all concerned
parties in order to realise lasting peace and stability in a denuclearised Korean
Peninsula. We expressed grave concern over the recent surge in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s (DPRK) intercontinental ballistic missile testing and
ballistic missile launches and the increased tension in the Korean Peninsula,
which are a worrisome development that threatens peace and stability in the
region. We called on the DPRK to comply fully with all relevant UNSC
Resolutions and called for peaceful dialogue among the concerned parties, and
continue working towards the realisation of lasting peace, and stability in a
denuclearised Korean Peninsula. We called for the full implementation of all
relevant UNSC Resolutions and noted international efforts to bring about the
complete, verifiable, and irreversible denuclearisation of the Korean Peninsula in
a peaceful manner. Diplomatic efforts, including the creation of a conducive
environment for peaceful dialogue among all concerned parties should remain a
priority. We reiterated our readiness to play a constructive role, including through
utilising ASEAN-led platforms such as the ARF in promoting a conducive
atmosphere for peaceful dialogue amongst the concerned parties.
Situation in Ukraine
155. With regard to Ukraine, as for all nations, we continued to reaffirm our respect
for sovereignty, political independence, and territorial integrity. We reiterated our
call for compliance with the UN Charter and international law. We underlined the
importance of an immediate cessation of hostilities and the serious engagement
in a genuine dialogue for the peaceful resolution of the conflict. We supported
the efforts of the UN Secretary-General in the search for a peaceful solution, and
in this regard noted efforts to discuss the way forward for a ceasefire in Ukraine.
30

We also called for the facilitation of rapid, safe, and unhindered access to
humanitarian assistance for those in need in Ukraine, and for the protection of
civilians, humanitarian personnel, and persons in vulnerable situations.
Situation in the Middle East
156. We expressed great concern over the continued tension in the Middle East and
called on all parties concerned to exercise self-restraint, avoid acts that may
aggravate the situation, and resolve differences through diplomacy and dialogue
in the interest of maintaining peace and stability in the region.
157. We expressed grave concern over the dire humanitarian situation in Gaza, which
has been exacerbated following the 7 October 2023 attacks and the resumption
of hostilities on 18 March 2025. We condemned all attacks against civilians and
civilian infrastructure, which have resulted in the alarming number of casualties,
particularly among women and children, the continued restricted access to
humanitarian aid, relief supplies and other basic needs, leading to the further
deterioration of the humanitarian crisis in Gaza. We urged all relevant parties to
accept the ceasefire proposal as outlined in paragraph 2 of UNSC Resolution
2735. We called for an immediate and permanent ceasefire and the immediate
and unconditional release of all hostages, especially women, children, the sick
and the elderly. We underscored the importance of release from any arbitrary
detention. We commended the efforts of various ASEAN Member States in
providing humanitarian assistance to Gaza, and urged all ASEAN Member
States and our external partners to continue providing and facilitating such
assistance for Gaza. We reaffirmed our support for the UN Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) in the execution of its
mandate. We called for the full resumption of rapid, safe, unimpeded and
sustained humanitarian access to all those in need, including through increased
capacity at border crossings, including by sea. We called on all parties to the
conflict to protect civilians and to abide by international humanitarian law and
international human rights law.
158. We reaffirmed our longstanding support for the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, including the rights to self-determination, and to their
homeland. In this regard, we urged all parties concerned to work towards a
peaceful resolution to the conflict with a view to realising the two-State solution
in accordance with international law and the relevant UNSC and UNGA
resolutions, including UNGA resolution A/RES/ES-10/23 on the Admission of
New Members to the UN dated 10 May 2024, and UNGA resolution A/RES/ES10/27 on protection of civilians and upholding legal and humanitarian obligations
dated 12 June 2025, which we all voted in favour. We took note, and some of us
underlined the importance of, the order on provisional measures issued by the
International Court of Justice (ICJ) on 26 January 2024. We acknowledged the
Advisory Opinion of the ICJ on 19 July 2024, which is of the opinion, among
others, that the United Nations, and especially the General Assembly, which
requested this opinion, and the Security Council, should consider the precise
modalities and further action required to bring to an end as rapidly as possible
the unlawful presence of the State of Israel in the Occupied Palestinian Territory.
In this context, we reaffirmed the importance of upholding international law.
31

159. We expressed concern over the escalation of tensions in the Middle East since
13 June 2025, and welcomed the ceasefire between Israel and Iran on 24 June
2025. We urged all parties to respect the ceasefire and avoid further escalation
of this conflict. We reaffirmed the obligation of all States to resolve their
differences through peaceful means and to respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of all nations, in line with international law, including the United Nations
(UN) Charter. We further reiterated the obligations to protect civilians and civilian
infrastructures in armed conflicts consistent with international law and relevant
UN Security Council resolutions. We supported ongoing efforts, including those
led by the UN, aimed at de-escalating tensions and facilitating the resumption of
constructive engagement among parties involved.
59th ASEAN FOREIGN MINISTERS’ MEETING
160. We looked forward to the convening of the 59th AMM, Post-Ministerial
Conferences, 27th APT Foreign Ministers’ Meeting, 16th EAS Foreign Ministers’
Meeting, and 33rd ARF in the Philippines, in 2026.

32

